# Wildfire-Chatbot
Wildfires have continued to be a significant threat to communities globally. AI assistants like Alexa provide weather forecasts, and a wildfire AI chatbot could similarly assess wildfire risk, detect high-risk areas, and offer emergency guidance. This research develops a personalized chatbot for location-specific wildfire risk classification that enhances community preparedness, empowers residents with tailored safety measures and prevention tips, and supports first responders during emergencies using AI. The chatbot integrates two distinct yet complementary functionalities triggered by the nature of the user's query. A zero-shot classifier determines the user’s intent. First, a custom machine learning (ML) model classifies area-specific fire risk and notifies a user of this risk, as well as alerts them of any nearby wildfires using real-time satellite (NASA FIRMS) and meteorological (NOAA) data, and any active fire alerts issued using the weather.gov API. Models like Logistic Regression and Gradient Boosting are considered for optimal accuracy. The model selected was a fine-tuned Gradient Boosting Classification model.  Second, the chatbot leverages Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) and Natural Language Processing (NLP) to respond to general wildfire-related inquiries, focusing on risk awareness, prevention, and preparedness. It accesses a vector database populated with wildfire data from sources such as FEMA’s Wildland-Urban Interface Fire program and the New Jersey Wildfire Risk Assessment Portal. A RAG pipeline built using Facebook AI Similarity Search (FAISS) for efficient vector search, LangChain for managing conversations and system integration, and a large language model enables the chatbot to deliver informed answers on topics like defensible space, prescribed burns, and emergency supplies.  The application is built in Python, and the web-based conversational interface was developed using Streamlit. The system is also developed with a commitment to human-centered AI principles and ethical AI design. 
